---
title: Rust for DataScience 2026   - TIL
description: My road map to learn rust as a machine learning engineer in 2026
author: kareem
date: 2025-12-14
draft: false
featured: true
categories:
  - blogging
  - til
image: til.jpg
---
## Rust for Data science 

Yesterday, I had and idea about creating a keyword spell checker for Arabic and I was trying to contribute to المعلم القرانئ project which needs some preprocessing pipelines and multiple projects that i am very curious how it's built in AI and some of them are : 
1. Polars : it's very efficient and interesting project I use it daily 
2. Qdrant:  my main vector database 
3. Fast-palid : multivector late interaction indexing built with rust 
And the list goes from inference engine for static embedding and much more. 

## رست للغلابة - أحمد فرغل 
I found Ahmed plalist about rust in Arabic speakers it's streaming videos around 3 hours each. 
I started with the first one because I tried to learn rust two times before and didn't understand it and I read the book 3 years ago. 

The Introduction and the way of explaining is very nice and cool one. 
I really love the idea of series : it's not just rust as language but Rust with programming thinking about how to design and Operating system works.. it makes the concepts a lot easier and practical. 
I loved how it compare rust features to other languages and how he explained how each concept affect other concept. 
In the first video he has explaining how something like 
```rust 
Let Data{
	a: u8,
	b: i32
}
```
What is the align , and their size and how it's added to memory in efficient way and why this is different from C language ..etc 
Why the order doesn't matter for rust compiler. 
How memory is working  like heap, stack , system calls , word, bytes how the compiler see them and use precompile, the explaining of why macro in rust exist and a lot of concepts I encountered before was very hard to me now they makes sense. 

I will continue the series it's rare one and the good thing he teach in Arabic ⭐⭐⭐
### Rust Project for ML 
I plan to do the following projects after I get some knowledge for rust
1. Better Docs for Rust and Python with code embedded search with static embedding model 
	1. The rust doc is amazing compared to the poor python documentation it's very bad and ugly one!
2. Lialia : Arabic keywords checker with Lexical search 
3. Bm25 with Rust 
	1. BMX from mixeadbread in Rust
4. Pyversity in Rust
5. Semhash + Rust + Qdrant 
6. RSS reader with DSPY 
7. Mgrep in Rust

## References 
1. [رست للغلابة](https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLald6EODoOJU0GMuYHlkS9MLhTPE7HiaT&si=3O-9VHNwmSN5M13t)